doc/user_guide/edml_user_guide.md, before:

# Getting Started With the Exasol Document Mapping Language (EDML)

For creating a Virtual Schema for document data you have to define a mapping 
from the document structure to a relational structure.
This is done using the Exasol Document Mapping Language (EDML) 
([reference](https://exasol.github.io/virtual-schema-common-document/schema_doc/edml_1.1.0/index.html)).
You have to define a mapping in a JSON document, upload it to a bucket in BucketFS and reference 
in the `CREATE VIRTUAL SCHEMA` call.

This guide explains how to define these mappings in general.
For data source specifics, check the corresponding virtual schema.
Different data sources use different data formats.
In this guide we use JSON.
  
For mapping multiple document sets, you can create multiple files, 
upload them to a folder and BucketFS and reference this folder. 

The structure of the mapping follows the structure of the document data.

## Simple Example

Given a DynamoDB table called `MY_BOOKS` that contains the following objects:

```json
{
  "isbn": "1763413749",
  "name": "Accessing NoSQL-Databases in Exasol using Virtual Schemas",
  "author": {
    "name": "Jakob Braun"
  }
}
```
We want to map documents like that to an Exasol table with the following structure:

```sql
CREATE TABLE BOOKS (
    ISBN        VARCHAR(20),
    NAME        VARCHAR(100),
    AUTHOR_NAME  VARCHAR(20)
);
```
The nested property `author.name` is mapped to the column `AUTHOR_NAME`. 

In order to let this adapter create the described mapping we create the following mapping definition:

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://schemas.exasol.com/edml-1.1.0.json",
  "source": "<data source specific source description>",
  "destinationTable": "BOOKS",
  "description": "Example mapping",
  "mapping": {
    "fields": {
      "isbn": {
        "toVarcharMapping": {
          "varcharColumnSize": 20,
          "description": "The isbn is mapped to a string with max length of 20",
          "overflowBehaviour": "ABORT",
          "required": true
        }
      },
      "name": {
        "toVarcharMapping": {
          "varcharColumnSize": 100,
          "description": "The name is mapped to a string with max length of 100",
          "overflowBehaviour": "TRUNCATE"
        }
      },
      "author": {
        "fields": {
          "name": {
            "toVarcharMapping": {
              "varcharColumnSize": 20,
              "destinationName": "AUTHOR_NAME",
              "description": "Maps the nested property authors.name to column authorName"
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The `source` property describes the source of the data. 
It's syntax and meaning is different for the different Virtual Schemas for different data sources. Check the corresponding user guide for details. 

Next we save this definition to a file, upload it to a bucket in 
BucketFS and reference it in the `CREATE VIRTUAL SCHEMA` call.

After running [creating a virtual schema](../README.md) (for example with the schema named `BOOKSHOP`) we can query the table using:

```
SELECT * FROM BOOKSHOP.BOOKS;
```

## Example of `toJsonMapping`

Document data can contain nested lists. Consider for example the following document.

```json
{
  "isbn": "1763413749",
  "name": "Accessing NoSQL-Databases in Exasol using Virtual Schemas",
  "topics": ["DynamoDB", "Exasol"]
}
```

We want to map such documents to an Exasol table in the following way:

```sql
CREATE TABLE BOOKS (
    ISBN        VARCHAR(20),
    NAME        VARCHAR(100),
    TOPICS      VARCHAR(200)
);
```
 
Where `TOPICS` is a `VARCHAR` column containing JSON strings like `["DynamoDB", "Exasol"]`.

To achieve this we create the following mapping definition:  

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://schemas.exasol.com/edml-1.1.0.json",
  "source": "<data source specific source description>",
  "destinationTable": "BOOKS",
  "description": "Example mapping",
  "mapping": {
    "fields": {
      "isbn": {
        "toVarcharMapping": {
          "varcharColumnSize": 20,
          "overflowBehaviour": "ABORT"
        }
      },
      "name": {
        "toVarcharMapping": {
          "varcharColumnSize": 100,
          "overflowBehaviour": "TRUNCATE"
        }
      },
      "topics": {
        "toJsonMapping": {
          "description": "Maps the sub document of this property to a JSON string",
          "varcharColumnSize": 200
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The toJsonMapping will map the nested document `topics` to a JSON string in a `TOPICS` column.


## Example of `toTableMapping`

We again want to map the document with a nested list.
But this time we want to map the nested list to a second table that references the original one using a foreign key. 

```json
{
  "isbn": "1763413749",
  "name": "Accessing NoSQL-Databases in Exasol using Virtual Schemas",
  "topics": ["DynamoDB", "Exasol"]
}
```

In addition we know that `isbn` is a unique property (for example since it is a primary key in the data source). 

We want to map such documents to the following relational structure: 

![Class diagram](mappingToTable.png) 

Note that `BOOKS_TOPICS` uses `ISBN` as FOREIGN KEY.

To achieve this we create the following mapping definition:

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://schemas.exasol.com/edml-1.1.0.json",
  "source": "<data source specific source description>",
  "destinationTable": "BOOKS",
  "description": "Example mapping",
  "mapping": {
    "fields": {
      "isbn": {
        "toVarcharMapping": {
          "varcharColumnSize": 20,
          "overflowBehaviour": "ABORT",
          "key": "global"
        }
      },
      "name": {
        "toVarcharMapping": {
          "varcharColumnSize": 100,
          "overflowBehaviour": "TRUNCATE"
        }
      },
      "topics": {
        "toTableMapping": {
          "mapping": {
            "toVarcharMapping": {
              "destinationName": "NAME"
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The Virtual Schema adapter automatically adds a foreign key to the table. In the example above, it adds
 the column `BOOKS_ISBN` to the `BOOKS_TOPICS` table. It did pick the `ISBN` column, because we marked 
 it as a key column.
 
 ### Key Types
 
 There are two different types of key: `global` and `local`. The difference only plays a role when mapping multi level nested lists.
 
 Consider the following example:
 A book contains multiple chapters and a chapter again can contain multiple figures.
 If in that example a chapter has a global key, that means, it is unique over all existing chapters (also across books).
 If it defines a local key, it is only unique over all chapters of that book.
 
 ### Autogenerated Keys
 
 If the data source supports it, the virtual schema adapter can also fetch the keys from the data source.
 In that case, the adapter will use a column as foreign key that is a unique key in the data source.
 
If you did not mark any column as key and the adapter could not detects any key column, it will add an `INDEX` column.
These columns contain the position of the element in the nested list.
So  in the example from above `DynamoDB` will receive the index 0 and `Exasol` the index 1. 


## Reference
[Schema mapping language reference](https://exasol.github.io/virtual-schema-common-ducument/schema_doc/edml_1.1.0/index.html)

Commit message:

#36 Added optional SOURCE_REFERENCE column (#38)
* #36 Added optional SOURCE_REFERENCE column

doc/user_guide/edml_user_guide.md, after:

# Getting Started With the Exasol Document Mapping Language (EDML)

For creating a Virtual Schema for document data you have to define a mapping 
from the document structure to a relational structure.
This is done using the Exasol Document Mapping Language (EDML) 
([reference](https://exasol.github.io/virtual-schema-common-document/schema_doc/edml_1.1.0/index.html)).
You have to define a mapping in a JSON document, upload it to a bucket in BucketFS and reference 
in the `CREATE VIRTUAL SCHEMA` call.

This guide explains how to define these mappings in general.
For data source specifics, check the corresponding virtual schema.
Different data sources use different data formats.
In this guide we use JSON.
  
For mapping multiple document sets, you can create multiple files, 
upload them to a folder and BucketFS and reference this folder. 

The structure of the mapping follows the structure of the document data.

## Simple Example

Given a DynamoDB table called `MY_BOOKS` that contains the following objects:

```json
{
  "isbn": "1763413749",
  "name": "Accessing NoSQL-Databases in Exasol using Virtual Schemas",
  "author": {
    "name": "Jakob Braun"
  }
}
```
We want to map documents like that to an Exasol table with the following structure:

```sql
CREATE TABLE BOOKS (
    ISBN        VARCHAR(20),
    NAME        VARCHAR(100),
    AUTHOR_NAME  VARCHAR(20)
);
```
The nested property `author.name` is mapped to the column `AUTHOR_NAME`. 

In order to let this adapter create the described mapping we create the following mapping definition:

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://schemas.exasol.com/edml-1.1.0.json",
  "source": "<data source specific source description>",
  "destinationTable": "BOOKS",
  "description": "Example mapping",
  "mapping": {
    "fields": {
      "isbn": {
        "toVarcharMapping": {
          "varcharColumnSize": 20,
          "description": "The isbn is mapped to a string with max length of 20",
          "overflowBehaviour": "ABORT",
          "required": true
        }
      },
      "name": {
        "toVarcharMapping": {
          "varcharColumnSize": 100,
          "description": "The name is mapped to a string with max length of 100",
          "overflowBehaviour": "TRUNCATE"
        }
      },
      "author": {
        "fields": {
          "name": {
            "toVarcharMapping": {
              "varcharColumnSize": 20,
              "destinationName": "AUTHOR_NAME",
              "description": "Maps the nested property authors.name to column authorName"
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The `source` property describes the source of the data. 
It's syntax and meaning is different for the different Virtual Schemas for different data sources. Check the corresponding user guide for details. 

Next we save this definition to a file, upload it to a bucket in 
BucketFS and reference it in the `CREATE VIRTUAL SCHEMA` call.

After running [creating a virtual schema](../README.md) (for example with the schema named `BOOKSHOP`) we can query the table using:

```
SELECT * FROM BOOKSHOP.BOOKS;
```

## Example of `toJsonMapping`

Document data can contain nested lists. Consider for example the following document.

```json
{
  "isbn": "1763413749",
  "name": "Accessing NoSQL-Databases in Exasol using Virtual Schemas",
  "topics": ["DynamoDB", "Exasol"]
}
```

We want to map such documents to an Exasol table in the following way:

```sql
CREATE TABLE BOOKS (
    ISBN        VARCHAR(20),
    NAME        VARCHAR(100),
    TOPICS      VARCHAR(200)
);
```
 
Where `TOPICS` is a `VARCHAR` column containing JSON strings like `["DynamoDB", "Exasol"]`.

To achieve this we create the following mapping definition:  

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://schemas.exasol.com/edml-1.1.0.json",
  "source": "<data source specific source description>",
  "destinationTable": "BOOKS",
  "description": "Example mapping",
  "mapping": {
    "fields": {
      "isbn": {
        "toVarcharMapping": {
          "varcharColumnSize": 20,
          "overflowBehaviour": "ABORT"
        }
      },
      "name": {
        "toVarcharMapping": {
          "varcharColumnSize": 100,
          "overflowBehaviour": "TRUNCATE"
        }
      },
      "topics": {
        "toJsonMapping": {
          "description": "Maps the sub document of this property to a JSON string",
          "varcharColumnSize": 200
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The toJsonMapping will map the nested document `topics` to a JSON string in a `TOPICS` column.


## Example of `toTableMapping`

We again want to map the document with a nested list.
But this time we want to map the nested list to a second table that references the original one using a foreign key. 

```json
{
  "isbn": "1763413749",
  "name": "Accessing NoSQL-Databases in Exasol using Virtual Schemas",
  "topics": ["DynamoDB", "Exasol"]
}
```

In addition we know that `isbn` is a unique property (for example since it is a primary key in the data source). 

We want to map such documents to the following relational structure: 

![Class diagram](mappingToTable.png) 

Note that `BOOKS_TOPICS` uses `ISBN` as FOREIGN KEY.

To achieve this we create the following mapping definition:

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://schemas.exasol.com/edml-1.1.0.json",
  "source": "<data source specific source description>",
  "destinationTable": "BOOKS",
  "description": "Example mapping",
  "mapping": {
    "fields": {
      "isbn": {
        "toVarcharMapping": {
          "varcharColumnSize": 20,
          "overflowBehaviour": "ABORT",
          "key": "global"
        }
      },
      "name": {
        "toVarcharMapping": {
          "varcharColumnSize": 100,
          "overflowBehaviour": "TRUNCATE"
        }
      },
      "topics": {
        "toTableMapping": {
          "mapping": {
            "toVarcharMapping": {
              "destinationName": "NAME"
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The Virtual Schema adapter automatically adds a foreign key to the table. In the example above, it adds
 the column `BOOKS_ISBN` to the `BOOKS_TOPICS` table. It did pick the `ISBN` column, because we marked 
 it as a key column.
 
 ### Key Types
 
 There are two different types of key: `global` and `local`. The difference only plays a role when mapping multi level nested lists.
 
 Consider the following example:
 A book contains multiple chapters and a chapter again can contain multiple figures.
 If in that example a chapter has a global key, that means, it is unique over all existing chapters (also across books).
 If it defines a local key, it is only unique over all chapters of that book.
 
 ### Autogenerated Keys
 
 If the data source supports it, the virtual schema adapter can also fetch the keys from the data source.
 In that case, the adapter will use a column as foreign key that is a unique key in the data source.
 
If you did not mark any column as key and the adapter could not detects any key column, it will add an `INDEX` column.
These columns contain the position of the element in the nested list.
So  in the example from above `DynamoDB` will receive the index 0 and `Exasol` the index 1. 

## Source Reference Column

Some dialects support reading one table from multiple sources.
For example the [files-virtual-schemas](https://github.com/exasol/virtual-schema-common-document-files) allow you to load each row from a different file.
In that case you may want to add the filename as a column to the Exasol table.
That allows you to query on it and by that only read the required files.

To do so, set `addSourceReferenceColumn: true` in the root object of your EDML definition.
The adapter will then automatically add a column named `SOURCE_REFERENCE` to the end of the table.

You can use this property for all dialects.
Typically it will, however, only give you additional information, if you load data from multiple sources.

The `SOURCE_REFERENCE` column has a maximum size of 2000 characters.
In case a source reference should exceed this, the adapter will throw an exception.  

## Reference
[Schema mapping language reference](https://exasol.github.io/virtual-schema-common-ducument/schema_doc/edml_1.1.0/index.html)
